docs: Document the usage of VMO in airgapped self-hosted instances (#3584)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/vm-management/install-vmo-in-airgap.md

---
sidebar_label: "Install VMO in Airgap Environments"
title: "Install VMO in Airgap Environments"
description: "Learn how to install VMO for use in self-hosted airgapped instances of Palette and Palette VerteX."
icon: " "
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 10
tags: ["vmo"]
---

> This guide explains how you can make the Virtual Machine Orchestrator (VMO) pack available for use in tenants that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Virtual Machine Orchestrator (VMO) pack is available for use in tenants that
```

belong to your airgapped self-hosted instance of Palette and Palette VerteX.

## Prerequisites

- An existing airgap instance of Palette or Palette VerteX. Refer to the
  [Self-Hosted Palette Installation](../enterprise-version/install-palette/install-palette.md) and
  [Palette VerteX Installation](../vertex/install-palette-vertex/install-palette-vertex.md) guides for more information.

- At least one tenant created for your airgap instance of Palette or Palette VerteX. Refer to
  [Tenant Management](../enterprise-version/system-management/tenant-management.md) for more information.

- Access to the Palette airgap support Virtual Machine (VM) that you used for the initial Palette installation.

- Access to the Palette system console.

> ## Install VMO in Airgap Environments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enablement
```

1. In your terminal, use the following command template to SSH into the Palette airgap support VM. Enter the path to
   your private SSH key, username, and the IP or domain of the airgap support VM. The default username is `ubuntu`.

   ```shell
   ssh -identity_file </path/to/private/key> <username>@<vm-ip-or-domain>
   ```

   Consider the following command example for reference.

   ```shell
   ssh -identity_file /docs/ssh-private-key.pem ubuntu@palette.example.com
   ```

> 2. Use the following command to switch to the `root` user account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Execute the following command to switch to the `root` user account.
```

   ```shell
   sudo --login
   ```

3. Refer to the [Palette Additional Packs](../enterprise-version/install-palette/airgap/supplemental-packs.md) page to
   download and install the **airgap-pack-virtual-machine-orchestrator** and **airgap-pack-spectro-proxy** packs.

4. If you are planning to deploy VMs with direct network access, repeat step three to install a load balancer pack of
   your choice. We recommend installing <VersionedLink text="MetalLB" url="/integrations/packs/?pack=lb-metallb" />
   (**airgap-pack-lb-metallb**), which you can find in
   [Palette Additional Packs](../enterprise-version/install-palette/airgap/supplemental-packs.md).

5. Log in to the Palette system console.

> 6. From the **left Main Menu**, select **Administration**, and then select the **Pack Registries** tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. From the left **Main Menu**, select **Administration**, and then select the **Pack Registries** tab.
```

7. Select the **three-dots Menu** of **spectro-packs** and click **Sync**.

   ![Palette system console displaying options for the spectro-packs registries.](/vm-management_install-vmo-in-airgap_sync-packs.webp)

   Once the sync is finished, the newly uploaded packs will be available for use in the tenants that belong to your
   airgapped instance of Palette or Palette VerteX.

## Validate

1. Log in to a tenant that belongs to your airgapped instance of Palette or Palette VerteX.

> 2. From the **left Main Menu**, select **Profiles** and click **Add Cluster Profile**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. From the left **Main Menu**, select **Profiles** and click **Add Cluster Profile**.
```
